Welcome to this new chapter: Shortest path
algorithms. You're at home and you want to go
to university. So you open Google maps app and you
enter your actual position and the destination you
want to go to. And here, it shows you the path
to take, it actually shows you shortest one.
Then you start wondering, how come
from thousands of roads and streets,
it could quickly find out that the
shortest path is this one? Very impressive.
The answer is that it uses algorithms to solve the
shortest path problem, the problem of finding a
path that takes us from a source to a destination
with the minimum cost, the topic of this chapter.
In a graph, to move between two vertices, we may
have multiple possible paths. And the shortest
path problem is the problem of finding the one
that has the smallest sum of weights of edges.
And those weights can represent distance,
cost, power, and many other things depending
on the situation. For example vertices can
represent locations and weights distances,
or vertices can represent flights and weights
represent the cost of the flight. Both of these
examples fall into the shortest path problem,
in both of them we want to find the path between
two vertices with the smallest sum of weights,
regardless of what does that weight represent.
In this graph, here is the shortest path from
A to E, its sum of weights is 8, 3+2+5+(-2).
You can try checking other paths if you want,
you will find other paths that go from A to E,
but you won't find one with a smaller sum of
weights, the one we found is the shortest path.
In brief, the shortest path problem is the
problem of finding the path that goes from s
to t that has the smallest total weight, such that
the total weight of a path is the sum of weights
of edges it's made of. Shortest path problem
covers both directed and undirected graphs,
but with directed graphs you need to
know that we search for a directed path,
the direction of edges must be respected, like in
the example we've seen, we got a directed path.
And the shortest path problem can also be
called the single-pair shortest path problem,
because we're interested by finding the
shortest path between only one pair of vertices.
But we have other variations, we have
for example the single-source shortest
path problem. In this one we want to
know the shortest path from a source
vertex s to all other vertices, it's
a bit different from the previous one.
We also have the single-destination shortest
path problem, where we want to know the shortest
path from all vertices to a single destination t.
And we have the all-pairs shortest path problem,
where we want to know the shortest path from each
vertex to each vertex, all pairs of vertices.
During this chapter, we will cover algorithms
that solve each of these variations.
We introduced the shortest path problem, we are
now ready to start discussing algorithms that find
such a path in a graph, get ready to discover
the Dijkstra's algorithm in the next lecture.